---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/Reference notes/zotero/Deloughry.Griffiths2009/","title":"Arterial tourniquets"}
---


# Arterial tourniquets
**Web link:** [Open online](https://doi.org/10.1093/bjaceaccp/mkp002)
**Zotero link:** [Open in Zotero](zotero://select/items/@Deloughry.Griffiths2009)
**Tags:** [Orthopaedic surgery](../../pages/Orthopaedic%20surgery.md), [tourniquet](tourniquet), 
- [x] Read

## Abstract



## Notes
# Annotations  
(8/15/2022, 10:08:45 PM)

“A [[tourniquet\|tourniquet]] is a device which is used to control the flow of blood to and/or from an extremity.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=56&annotation=HGR4J5M9) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 56](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“The word [[tourniquet\|tourniquet]] itself derives from the French verb tourner (to turn) and was first used by the eighteenth-century French surgeon Louis Petit describing the screw-like device he strapped to the thighs of patients undergoing leg amputations, to reduce blood loss.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=56&annotation=ZH369AD7) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 56](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“The arterial tourniquet is usually a pneumatic device consisting of an inflatable cuff connected to a compressed gas supply. The measurable and high pressures that such tourniquets can generate allow controlled arterial compression and distal circulatory stasis.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=56&annotation=VMHZHTH4) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 56](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Local effects are the result of tissue ischaemia distal to the inflated tourniquet and a combination of ==ischaemia== and ==compression== of the tissues beneath it.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=56&annotation=3LQCPCRW) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 56](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Following inflation of the tourniquet, there is a progressive ↓ PO2 and an ↑ PCO2 within muscle cells. Energy stores steadily decline with time and intracellular stores of [[ATP\|ATP]] and creatine phosphate are exhausted after ==2 and 3 h==, respectively. [[Lactate\|Lactate]] concentration increases with the switch to anaerobic metabolism and, with ↑ PCO2, contributes to the development of an intracellular acidosis. Changes to the histological appearances of muscle fibres occur after tourniquet inflation. Marked changes in mitochondrial morphology are visible after ==1 h== of ischaemia. Muscle underlying the tourniquet subjected to both ischaemia and compression is prone to developing changes such as local fibre necrosis after inflation times as short as 2 h.” ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 56](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Microvascular injury occurs in muscle after ischaemia of greater than ==2 h== duration. After tourniquet release, increased vascular permeability results in interstitial and intracellular oedema which frequently leads to the ‘==posttourniquet syndrome==’, in which the patient has a swollen, pale, stiff limb with weakness but no paralysis. This post-tourniquet syndrome typically lasts ==1– 6 weeks==.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=56&annotation=B3RAUR9L) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 56](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“A ==physiological conduction block== develops between ==15 and 45 min== after inflation of a cuff around the arm to a supra-systolic pressure. The conduction block affects both motor and sensory modalities and is ==reversible== after deflation of the cuff. The rate of development of this conduction block is the same with cuff pressures of 150 and 300 mm Hg which suggests that ==ischaemia== rather than direct compression is the cause.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=56&annotation=F9SH2P9Y) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 56](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“==Direct mechanical compression== of nerves is responsible for a second, longer lasting nerve conduction block called ‘==tourniquet paralysis==’. Higher cuff pressures (e.g. 1000 mm Hg maintained for .1 h) can cause morphological changes within the ==larger myelinated nerves== which is most marked at the sites where the pressure gradient between compressed and uncompressed nerve is greatest: at the proximal and distal edges of the tourniquet. The pressure gradient results in ==displacement of the nodes of Ranvier==, stretching and degeneration of ==paranodal myelin== and impaired nerve conduction lasting up to ==6 months.==” ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“After limb exsanguination and tourniquet inflation, there is ↑ [systemic vascular resistance](../../Knowledge/Medicine/systemic%20vascular%20resistance.md) and an effective ↑ circulating blood volume. This leads to an ↑ [[Knowledge/Medicine/Central venous pressure\|central venous pressure]] and in most instances an accompanying ↑ systolic arterial pressure, both of which are usually transient.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=57&annotation=KGEYW5MH) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Application of bilateral thigh tourniquets can ↑ effective circulating blood volume by up to ==15==% (750 ml in an adult). Such large increases in circulating blood volume may cause large and sustained increases in central venous pressure and circulatory overload. Cardiac failure and cardiac arrest have been reported after the application of bilateral thigh tourniquets. Following the initial transient increase in arterial pressure, it is common to see a ==second, gradual increase== in arterial pressure. This is thought to accompany the development of ==tourniquet pain== and develops a variable period of time after inflation. The rise in arterial pressure can be attenuated by the addition of [[Knowledge/Medicine/Ketamine\|ketamine]] (0.25 mg/kg), this may also help with tourniquet pain.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=57&annotation=QRUZVC2I) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“On tourniquet deflation, post-ischaemic reactive hyperaemia is seen; this causes a transient increase in the volume of blood in the limb compared with baseline levels. Simultaneously, metabolites from the ischaemic limb are released into the systemic circulation. In combination with the redistribution of blood flow, this often causes a decrease in both central venous and systolic pressures, which is temporary but can be dramatic.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=57&annotation=NUHDRAAS) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“==Deflation== of the tourniquet is followed almost immediately by an increase in end-tidal carbon dioxide concentration (FE0 CO2) which usually peaks within 1 min. The increase in FE0 CO2 occurs for two reasons: mixed venous PCO2 ↑ (after release of hypercapnic blood from the ischaemic area distal to the tourniquet into the systemic circulation) and also cardiac output ↑ after tourniquet deflation (in response to the decrease in arterial pressure described above). The peak increase in end-tidal CO2 concentration is greater with deflation of lower limb tourniquets (0.7–2.4 kPa) than with upper limb tourniquets (0.1– 1.6 kPa).4 The duration of the increase in FE0 CO2 depends on the ventilatory characteristics of the patient. In spontaneously breathing patients, minute ventilation increases rapidly and so FE0 CO2 returns to baseline values within 3 5 min. In patients undergoing controlled ventilation, the FE0 CO2 will typically remain raised for .6 min unless minute ventilation is deliberately increased.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=57&annotation=5LDY8WMJ) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“The increase in PaCO2 which accompanies deflation of the tourniquet causes an increase in cerebral blood flow. Measurements of middle cerebral artery blood flow velocity show an increase of up to 50%. In patients with head injuries, the increase in cerebral blood flow can cause an increase in intracranial pressure and worsen the degree of secondary brain injury.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=57&annotation=6DG3AQUH) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Tourniquet inflation during surgery is associated with a ==global hypercoagulable== state. This is attributable to increased [[Knowledge/Medicine/platelet\|platelet]] aggregation caused by catecholamines released in response to pain from surgery and the tourniquet itself. However, there is no difference in the incidence of [[deep vein thrombosis\|deep vein thrombosis]] in surgery on lower limbs performed with and without a tourniquet. After deflation of the tourniquet, there is a brief period of ↑ fibrinolytic activity. This increase is maximal at 15 min and returns to preoperative levels within 30 min of tourniquet release, but may nevertheless cause increased bleeding. The ↑ [[fibrinolysis\|fibrinolysis]] is caused by release of [[tissue plasminogen activator\|tissue plasminogen activator]], which is thought to be produced by the ==vasa vasorum== in the affected limb in response to the acidosis and hypoxaemia associated with tourniquet application.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=57&annotation=N87XQUJJ) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Inflation of arterial tourniquets is associated with a gradual increase in core body temperature caused by reduced heat transfer to and heat loss from the ischaemic limb. The magnitude of this increase is small” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=57&annotation=F2ZKA5LN) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Tourniquet deflation causes a transient decrease in core temperature, primarily caused by redistribution of body heat.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=57&annotation=5Q5RSI72) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Deflation of the tourniquet after 1– 2 h of ischaemia is associated with small increases in plasma concentrations of [[potassium\|potassium]] and lactate. Peak increases of 0.3 and 2 mmol litre21, respectively, occur 3 min after deflation.5 [[Lactate\|Lactate]] and [[carbon dioxide\|carbon dioxide]] returning to the systemic circulation from the ischaemic limb cause a reduction in arterial pH. Reperfusion of the ischaemic limb and the other haemodynamic changes associated with tourniquet deflation can cause brief increases in oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production. The magnitude of these changes correlates with the duration of ischaemia. All of these changes are fully reversed within 30 min of tourniquet deflation.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=57&annotation=TM74CT8W) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 57](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Out of 63 484 operations performed under a tourniquet, only 26 complications that might have been caused by the tourniquet were reported (an incidence ==0.04==%).” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=58&annotation=STJVJPR2) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 58](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Lower limb tourniquets were more likely to produce neurological complications than upper limb tourniquets. The nerves most commonly affected are the [[sciatic nerve\|sciatic nerve]] in the lower limb and the [[radial nerve\|radial nerve]] in the upper limb.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=58&annotation=6ZI8LXYR) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 58](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“==Large diameter== nerve fibres are more susceptible to pressure, so there is a relative sparing of sensation compared with motor function. The role of mechanical pressure in nerve injury probably explains why the Esmarch bandage (which can generate pressures .1000 mm Hg) is associated with a higher incidence of nerve injury. The effects of nerve compression at the site of tourniquet application may make injury at a more distal site (caused by ischaemia or surgical trauma) more likely due to the neural ‘==double crush==’.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=58&annotation=NQCA4S9D) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 58](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Very rarely the post-ischaemic swelling and oedema, in combination with reperfusion hyperaemia, may lead to the development of a [[compartment syndrome\|compartment syndrome]]. [[Rhabdomyolysis\|Rhabdomyolysis]] directly related to the tourniquet use has been reported, but is extremely rare.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=58&annotation=XWFN6P62) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 58](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Acute vascular insufficiency is thought to occur when mechanical pressure from the tourniquet damages atheromatous vessels, causing ==plaque rupture==.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=58&annotation=5C7ZBXJC) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 58](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Inflation of a tourniquet is followed by the development of a dull, aching pain. Such pain can accompany otherwise adequate regional anaesthesia and can be severe enough to necessitate conversion to general anaesthesia.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=58&annotation=I48AJNGL) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 58](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“It is thought that tourniquet pain is predominantly mediated by unmyelinated, slowly conducting C-fibres which, as stated earlier, are less affected by the compressive effects of tourniquet inflation than larger fibres. One theory suggests that tourniquet pain arises from selective transmission by cutaneous C-fibres; these fibres are continuously stimulated by skin compression from the tourniquet, and their post-synaptic effect at the dorsal horn is no longer inhibited by input from larger nerve fibres whose transmission has been blocked. This theory is supported by the finding that during i.v. regional anaesthesia, tourniquet analgesia is prolonged by application of EMLA cream beneath the tourniquet” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=58&annotation=UJFB3YUK) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 58](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“tourniquet pain can complicate spinal or epidural anaesthesia, despite apparently adequate anaesthesia of the sensory dermatome underlying the tourniquet. One explanation of this is offered by the in vitro finding that ==smaller unmyelinated C-fibres are more resistant to local anaesthetic-induced conduction block than larger, myelinated A-fibres==.10 After intrathecal administration of an adequate dose of local anaesthetic, conduction in both A- and C-fibres is blocked. However, as the concentration of local anaesthetic in the cerebrospinal fluid decreases, C-fibres start to conduct impulses before the A-fibres, resulting in a dull tourniquet pain in the presence of an anaesthetic which, assessed by pinprick, appears adequate.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=58&annotation=FYDDIE2G) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 58](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“there is no completely satisfactory solution. Various techniques have been used, including increasing the density of central neuraxial block by using adjuncts to bupivacaine such as epinephrine, morphine, and clonidine.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=58&annotation=S2UWL88Q) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 58](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“some success has also been reported with the administration of preoperative gabapentin and the use of low-dose (0.1 mg/kg) i.v. ketamine.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=59&annotation=VEJ9R66Q) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 59](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“A gradual increase in arterial pressure is frequently observed a variable time after tourniquet inflation. The exact mechanism of this tourniquet-induced hypertension is not known, but it has been suggested that it represents activation of the sympathetic nervous system in response to the development of tourniquet pain.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=59&annotation=KXBHNBR6) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 59](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“The Association of peri-operative Registered Nurses (AORN) in the USA recommends inflating tourniquets to pressures based on the ==limb occlusion pressure== (LOP).12 This value is determined by gradually increasing the pressure in the tourniquet while assessing distal blood flow with a Doppler probe held over a distal artery. The LOP is the pressure in the cuff at which the arterial pulse disappears. The LOP is usually higher than systolic pressure because the pressure from the tourniquet which is transmitted to deep underlying soft tissues is frequently less than that in the tourniquet itself. The percentage of transmitted tourniquet pressure varies inversely with limb circumference (hence the practice of using higher pressures on the thigh than on the upper arm).” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=59&annotation=PEBUFRHV) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 59](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“Most recommendations in the literature suggest a period of ==1.5 –2 h== in a healthy adult, which corresponds to the point at which muscle [[ATP\|ATP]] stores are depleted. Although ischaemia has typically been associated with muscular rather than neurological injury, there is an approximate three-fold increase in the risk of neurological complications for each 30 min increase in tourniquet time.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=59&annotation=K82KXWKP) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 59](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

“It is generally considered that the tourniquet should be left deflated for 10–15 min before re-inflation and this seems to correspond to restoration of muscle ATP levels. It is important to re-exsanguinate the limb before inflating the cuff again after reperfusion.” [Go to annotation](zotero://open-pdf/library/items/6NUQHW8S?page=59&annotation=KC863L2J) ([Deloughry and Griffiths, 2009, p. 59](zotero://select/library/items/58HSPWC7))

## References to check out